---
title: Blogging with GitHub and Jekyll
layout: seminar
---

This time we are going to create a project site in Github. You can create as many of these as you like on a single GitHub account.

Create a new GitHub project in the usual way.

Follow the instructions on [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/). Set up a *"Project site"*, *"Start from scratch"*, and *"Make gh-pages the default branch"*.

Next, go to your development environment. Nitrous is recommended unless you are comfortable with setting things up on your own computer. Clone your project.

Follow the [Jekyll Quick-start guide](http://jekyllrb.com/docs/quickstart/). Install Jekyll. Run:

    jekyll new <your-project-name> --force 

The `--force` flag tells Jekyll to create a jekyll site over the top of an existing directory structure--in this case, your recently cloned repo. This will overwrite any existing files that jekyll uses, which in this case will include your original index file.

`cd` into your repo and take a look at the directory structure. Do a quick `git status`, if you like.

Run:

    jekyll serve

Use the *Preview* menu to look at your website on *Port 4000*.

Take a good look at all the files that have been created. In particular, take a good look in `_posts` and `_layouts` and at `index.html`.

Edit the files, to taste.

Add, commit and push the repo back to GitHub. Take a look at them live on GitHub.

You will probably find that you have lost your styling on the live site. If so, read [Deploying Jekyll to GitHub Pages](http://jekyllrb.com/docs/github-pages/), paying attention to the page on *Project Page URL Structure* and the use of `site.baseurl` in your templates.

There is a lot to learn about how Jekyll works. Return to the Jekyll docs and try things out on your site.

If you like, [set up a custom domain](https://help.github.com/articles/setting-up-a-custom-domain-with-pages). This can be a bit tricky and varies slightly from one domain hosting provider to another. Here are [some instructions for Namecheap](http://davidensinger.com/2013/03/setting-the-dns-for-github-pages-on-namecheap/).

That's it for now.

  

