---
layout: seminar
title: Using Jinja
---
Jinja is a templating system. It is not unlike the templating system used by Jekyll.

In order to get jinja (actually, *jinja2*) working in a webapp2 application, it needs to be imported into your app file:

    import os
    import jinja2

And loaded into your app environment:

    template_dir = os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__file__), 'templates')
    jinja_env = jinja2.Environment(
                  loader = jinja2.FileSystemLoader(template_dir),
                  autoescape = True)

There is quite a bit going on here:

    os.path.dirname(__file__)

`__file__` is a Python *magic constant*. It refers to the python fie that is currently being run. 

Above, we imported the `os` package, which gives us access to some useful methods for getting information about your operating system. 

In this case, `os.path.dirname(__file__)` gives the path in the file system of the current file.

    os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__file__), 'templates')

`os.path.join` joins together path fragments to make a new path. So:

    template_dir = os.path.join(os.path.dirname(__file__), 'templates')

just identifies where you are keeping your templates. In this case, in a *templates* directory in the same location as the current file.

    jinja_env = jinja2.Environment(...)

Creates an instance of the `jinja2.Environment` class. This will give you access to all the methods required for rendering templates.

    (loader = jinja2.FileSystemLoader(template_dir), autoescape = True)

These two arguments tell your *jinja_env* object where to load templates from and also to escape all content loaded into a template, i.e. automatically remove or render harmless any HTML or JavaScript code.

The next step in adding templates to your application is to create a method for returning a new HTML string made up for a template with your data inserted into the template in the appropriate place.

    def render_str(template, **params):
        t = jinja_env.get_template(template)
        return t.render(params)

The second argument to our function is `**params`. The `**` has a special meaning in this context in Python. It means *"collect up any key-value pairs sent as arguments to the function and turn them into a dictionary"*. So, *params* will be a dictionary that can be used in the function.

`get_template` is a jinja method that returns a *template* object. And `render` is a method of the template object that returns a string.

We now have a way of inserting arbitrary data into arbitrary templates. 

Finally, we want to define a new *render* method in our handlers, which we will use instead of `response.write`. We do this by subclassing `RequestHandler` and then using this new class as the superclass for all our handlers.

    class BaseHandler(webapp2.RequestHandler):
        
        def render(self, template, **kw):
            self.response.write(render_str(template, **kw))

Now we use `self.render` instead of `self.response.write` to produce output.

This may all look a bit overwhelming, but in just a few lines it gives us a lot of power. It is a good example of the uses of object-oriented programming to redefine behaviour.

Next time, we will go in to how to actually write templates in jinja.

