---
layout: seminar
title: Model-View-Controller
---
The [Model-View-Controller](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model%E2%80%93view%E2%80%93controller) application design pattern is widely used by web frameworks, including Ruby on Rails.

Although there is some argument about the exact meaning of *MVC* and which application frameworks actually follow it, in its simplest sense it amounts to, the separation of the code that stores and retrieves data from the database, the code that displays the data, and the code that handles requests for data to be updated or displayed.

In the context of webapp2, it may be helpful to think of this pattern as *Model-Template-Handler*, because models, templates and handlers are what we are familiar with.

It is the models, templates and handlers that we need to separate out from our main application file.

####Deciding on an overall design

In a webapp2 application, this is what we start with:

    app.py
    app.yaml

We might then add a template directory:

    app.py
    app.yaml
    templates/

We might then want to add *handler* and *model* directories:

    app.py
    app.yaml
    handlers/
    models/
    templates/

We then might want to create files for all the handlers and models:

    app.py
    app.yaml
    handlers/
      user_handler.py
      blog_handler.py
    models/
      user.py
      blog.py
    templates/

And for the templates:

    app.py
    app.yaml
    handlers/
      blog_handler.py
      user_handler.py
    models/
      blog.py
      user.py
    templates/
      blog/
        index.html
        show.html
        edit.html
      user/
        index.html
        show.html
        edit.html

This layout is one option. It is not the only one. 

####Adding *\__init__.py* files

Having decided on a design, there is one more thing we need to do before we can start refactoring *app.py*: add empty `__init__.py` files:

    __init__.py
    app.py
    app.yaml
    handlers/
      __init__.py
      blog_handler.py
      user_handler.py
    models/
      __init__.py
      blog.py
      user.py
    templates/

These `__init__.py` files tell your application to treat the your directories as containing packages that can now be referenced in your code like this:

     import handlers.blog_handler

They need to be added to every directory inside your main directory that contains code that you might want to import.

####Refactoring your code

The task now is to take our existing code and and refactor it to reflect this new structure.

Probably the easiest way to start is to:

1. Create empty versions of all the new files;
1. Rename your existing *app.py* file to somethinlg like *app_old.py*;
1. Create a new empty *app.py* application file.

Then start adding code to the new file:

1. Start by moving the code for creating your *app* object out of the old app file and into the new one;
1. *Import* the old file into the new one;
1. Get your application running.

Your new *app.py* file might look something like this:

    import WSGIApplication from webapp2
    import * from app_old

    app = WSGIApplication(['/', MainHandler])

We have imported just the *WSGIApplication* class from *webapp2* and we have imported everything (`*`) from *app_old*, so that we can access the handlers, like *MainHandler*, without having to explicitly reference the imported file, like `app_old.MainHandler`.

This is just the start. We now need to start separating out the code in *app_old.py*. Gradually start moving code, class-by-class and function-by-function, out of the old file.

As you separate the models from the handlers, you will need to add extra methods to your model classes. You will need a constructor (`__init__`) method for each model, which might look something like this:

    class Post(db.Model):

      def __init__(self, id):
        key = db.Key.from_path('Post', int(post_id), parent=blog_key())
        self.data = db.get(key)

You will then be able to access the data by creating model objects in your handlers. Something like this:

    class PostPage(BlogHandler):

      def get(self, post_id):
        p = Post(id)
        self.render("posts/show.html", post = p.data)

At the end of the process there should be no database code in the handlers and there should be no references to templates or rendering in the models. 

Well done. You now have a nicely refactored application. 
 





 
